# Acknowledgements

The ideas in this book originate from people I respect a lot. Dan North, Chris Matts, Liz Kheogh derived the practice called BDD, which is one of the best example of a Living Documentation at work. Eric Evans in his book Domain-Driven Design proposed many ideas that in turn inspired BDD. Gojko Adzic proposed the name "Living Documentation" in his book Specification by Example. This book elaborates on these ideas and generalizes them to other areas of a software project.

DDD has emphasized how the thinking evolves during the life of a project, and proposed to unify domain model and code. Similarly, this book suggests to unify project artifacts and documentation.

The patterns movement and its authors, starting with Ward Cunningham and Kent Beck, made it increasingly obvious that it is possible to do a better documentation by referring to patterns, already published or to author through PLoP conferences.

Pragmatic Programmers, Martin Fowler, Ade Oshyneye, Andreas Ruping, Simon Brown and many other authors distilled nugets of wisdom on how to do better documentation, in a better way. Rinat Abdulin first wrote on Living Diagrams, he coined the word as far as I know. Thanks to you all guys!

Eric Evans, thanks for all the discussions with you, usually not on this book, and for your advices.

I would also like to thank Brian Marick for sharing to me his own work on Visible Workings. As encouragements matter, discussions with Vaughn Vernon and Sandro Mancuso on writing a book did help me, so thanks guys!

Some discussions are more important than others, when they generate new ideas, lead to better understanding, or when they are just exciting. Thanks to George Dinwiddie, Paul Rayner, Jeremie Chassaing, Arnauld Loyer and Romeu Moura for all the exciting discussions and for sharing your own stories and experiments.

Through the writing of this book I've been looking for ideas and feedbacks as much as I could, and in particular during open space sessions at software development conferences. Maxime Saglan gave me the first encouraging feedback, along with Franziska Sauerwein, so thanks Franzi and Max! I want to thank all the participants of the sessions I ran on Living Documentation in these conferences and unconferences, for example in Agile France, Socrates Germany, Socrates France, Codefreeze Finland, and during the Meetup Software Craftsmanship Paris round tables and several Jams of Code at Arolla in the evening.

I've been giving talks at conference for some time now, but always around practices already widely accepted in our industry. With more novel content like Living Documentation I also had to test the acceptance from various audiences, and I thank the first conferences who took the risk to select the topic: NCrafts in Paris, Domain-Driven Design eXchange in London, Bdx.io in Bordeaux and ITAKE Bucharest for hosting the first versions of the talk or workshop. It is very helpful to have great feedback to spend more effort into the book.

I am very lucky at Arolla to have a community of passionate colleagues; thanks you all for your contributions and for being my very first audience, in particular Fabien Maury, Romeu Moura, Arnauld Loyer, Yvan Vu and Somkiane Vongnoukoun. Somkiane suggested to add stories to make the text "less boring" and it was one of the best ideas to improve the book.

Thanks to the coachs of the Craftsmanship center at SGCIB for all the lunch discussions and ideas, and their enthusiasm to get better in how we do software. In particular Gilles Philippart, mentioned several times in this book for his ideas, and Bruno Boucard, Thomas Pierrain. I must also thank Clémo Charnay and Alexandre Pavillon for early supporting some of the ideas as experiments in the SGCIB commodity trading department Information System, and Bruno Dupuis and James Kouthon for their help making it become real. Many of the ideas in this book have been tried in the previous companies I worked with: the Commodity department at SGCIB, the Asset Arena teams at Sungard Asset Management, all the folks at Swapstream and our colleagues at CME, and others.

Thanks to Café Loustic and all the great baristas there. This was the perfect place as an author, where I've written many chapters, usually powered by an Ethiopean single origin coffee from Cafènation.

Lastly, I want to thank my wife Yunshan who's always been supporting and encouraging throughout the book. You also made the book a more pleasant experience thanks to your cute little pictures! Chérie, your support was key, and I want to support your own projects the same way you did with this book.
